Behavioral archaeology "grew out of an increasing realization, shared by Binford, that the systemic or living context that produced the archaeological record was radically different from the archaeological record.  From the beginning, behavioral archaeologists, as David Clarke (1968) had already done, focused on the need to create a science of material culture.  This approach included research such as William Rathje's Garbage Project, which employed techyniques of archaeological analysis to study c hanging patterns in the use and disposal of goods by residents of the modern city of Tuscon, Arizona.  Behavioral archaeologists maintained that cultural variability in the archaeological record was best explained by determining the interactions involving people and artifacts.  In purssuing this course, they were carrying on Binford's search for univeraslly-valid correlations between material culture and human behavior." (Trigger 426)

Schiffer's "science of material culture based on a corpus of regularities that could account for archaeological findings.  These regularities included generalizations that explained why people behaved as they did in specific living contexts as well as what happened to artifacts after they entered an archaeological c ontext.  Such theories of behavior related to artifact design, manufacture, use, and alteration over time.  Not only was the *primary emphasis of behavioral archaeology on behavior rather than culture* but, as with the systemic approach, ecological adaptation provided only one source of explanation among many."

Three sets of factors for gaining a more accurate understanding of a past behavioral system:

- "correlates" -- "which related to specific types of human behavior. Correlates provided reliable indicators permitting archaeologists to infer how artifacts were made, distributed, sued, and recycled in living societies.
- C-transforms: cultural transformation processes, "how material was transferred from a systemic to an archaeological context," "how items were discarded in the normal operation of a cultural system
- N-transforms: "non-cultural transformation processes."  natural wethering

"As belief in neoevolutionism waned and the diversity of human behavior increasingly was accepted, this limitation tended to be acknowledged as being inherent in the data rather than a methodological weakness.  Hence, although behavioral archaeologists continued ot apply7 Schiffer's approach profitably, few of them, including Schiffer himself, expected his original program to be fully realized." (Trigger 428)

