Michael Schiffer, an archaeologist who first established himself as a founder of **"behavioral archaeology"** and opponent of **processualism**, later in his career wrote a cultural history of the portable radio.

Rodney Harrison (@harrison_surface_2011) provides some background on Schiffer's contributions to the field ("Archaeological Context and Systemic Context," 1972; *Behavioral Archaeology,* 1976), in his discussion of the term "assemblage."  He writes, "the first way of understanding the term 'assemblage' is a familiar archaeological one, in which the assemblage is defined as a group of artefacts found in association with each other in a single context.  The formation of an archaeological assemblage is perceived to be the result of both natural and cultural processes."  Schiffer, he continues,

> famously described the taphonomic processes by which a group of things are transformed into an archaeological assemblage by way of cultural ('C-transforms') and natural ('N-transforms') transformations.  He referred to this as the movement from the systemic context (the original set of relationships between human behaviours and material things) to the archaeological context (the archaeological assemblage which is studied by the archaeologist).  'C-transforms' include a range of cultural processes, such as intentional or non-intentional discard, recycling or reuse, while 'N-transforms' include processes such as biological and chemical weathering and decay.  In surface survey, the context is much more complex than in stratified deposits, and in the case of a deflated surface the surface assemblage might contain a mix of artefacts from a number of different time periods.  Such archaeological sites might be understood as palimpsests, the assemblages at the surface of which are mixed and contain traces from a number of different occupations which are jumbled together.  Implicit within an archaeological use of the term is the idea of the assemblage as a contemporary construction, i.e. the assemblage is created as part of an engagement of an archaeologist-s contemporary classificatory gaze with a series of material remains from the past.  It arises out of the relationship between past and present, and between a contemporary external observer and a set of activities carried out by particular people and particular 'things' in the past. (155)

Trigger, writing on the growing insistence that archaeology not be merely a positivist discipline, but one self-aware about the history of its own methods, says that Schiffer was a critic of this more meta-, historical approach.  "Schiffer (1976: 193) once asserted that graduate courses should cease to be 'histories of thought' and instead should systematically expound and articulate current theories, as, in a general sort of way, K.R. Dark has since done in his book *Theoretical Archaeology* (1995).  Schiffer's position embodied the view that the truth or falseness of theoretical formulations is independent of social influences and hence of history but can be determined by applying scientifically valid procedures of evaluation to adequate bodies of data.  Taken to an extreme, this view implies that the history and philosophy of archaeology are totally unrelated to each other." (@trigger_history_2006, 2)

```
All of this perhaps echoes Latour's intervention in "Has Critique Run Out of Steam?", a plea to return to "matters of fact" and add to reality, "never to get *away* from the facts but *closer* to them, not fighting empiricism but, on the contrary, renewing empiricism" (231).  "The mistake we made, the mistake I made, was to believe that there was no efficient way to criticize matters of fact except by moving *away* from them and directing one's attention *toward* the conditions that made them possible.  But this meant accepting much to uncritically what matters of fact were."

I wonder if Schiffer would be sympathetic to Latour's view that "Reality is not defined by matters of fact.  Matters of fact are not all that is given in experience.  Matters of fact are only very partial and, I would argue, very polemical, very political renderings of matters of concern and only a subset of what could be called 
```